5.2 Reliable Byte Stream (TCP)
==============================

In contrast to a simple demultiplexing protocol like UDP, a more
sophisticated transport protocol is one that offers a reliable,
connection-oriented, byte-stream service. Such a service has proven
useful to a wide assortment of applications because it frees the
application from having to worry about missing or reordered data. The
Internet’s Transmission Control Protocol is probably the most widely
used protocol of this type; it is also the most carefully tuned. It is
for these two reasons that this section studies TCP in detail, although
we identify and discuss alternative design choices at the end of the
section.

In terms of the properties of transport protocols given in the problem
statement at the start of this chapter, TCP guarantees the reliable,
in-order delivery of a stream of bytes. It is a full-duplex protocol,
meaning that each TCP connection supports a pair of byte streams, one
flowing in each direction. It also includes a flow-control mechanism for
each of these byte streams that allows the receiver to limit how much
data the sender can transmit at a given time. Finally, like UDP, TCP
supports a demultiplexing mechanism that allows multiple application
programs on any given host to simultaneously carry on a conversation
with their peers.

In addition to the above features, TCP also implements a highly tuned
congestion-control mechanism. The idea of this mechanism is to throttle
how fast TCP sends data, not for the sake of keeping the sender from
over-running the receiver, but so as to keep the sender from overloading
the network. A description of TCP’s congestion-control mechanism is
postponed until the next chapter, where we discuss it in the larger
context of how network resources are fairly allocated.

Since many people confuse congestion control and flow control, we
restate the difference. *Flow control* involves preventing senders from
over-running the capacity of receivers. *Congestion control* involves
preventing too much data from being injected into the network, thereby
causing switches or links to become overloaded. Thus, flow control is an
end-to-end issue, while congestion control is concerned with how hosts
and networks interact.

End-to-End Issues
-----------------

At the heart of TCP is the sliding window algorithm. Even though this is
the same basic algorithm as is often used at the link level, because TCP
runs over the Internet rather than a physical point-to-point link, there
are many important differences. This subsection identifies these
differences and explains how they complicate TCP. The following
subsections then describe how TCP addresses these and other
complications.

First, whereas the link-level sliding window algorithm presented runs
over a single physical link that always connects the same two computers,
TCP supports logical connections between processes that are running on
any two computers in the Internet. This means that TCP needs an explicit
connection establishment phase during which the two sides of the
connection agree to exchange data with each other. This difference is
analogous to having to dial up the other party, rather than having a
dedicated phone line. TCP also has an explicit connection teardown
phase. One of the things that happens during connection establishment is
that the two parties establish some shared state to enable the sliding
window algorithm to begin. Connection teardown is needed so each host
knows it is OK to free this state.

Second, whereas a single physical link that always connects the same two
computers has a fixed round-trip time (RTT), TCP connections are likely
to have widely different round-trip times. For example, a TCP connection
between a host in San Francisco and a host in Boston, which are
separated by several thousand kilometers, might have an RTT of 100 ms,
while a TCP connection between two hosts in the same room, only a few
meters apart, might have an RTT of only 1 ms. The same TCP protocol must
be able to support both of these connections. To make matters worse, the
TCP connection between hosts in San Francisco and Boston might have an
RTT of 100 ms at 3 a.m., but an RTT of 500 ms at 3 p.m. Variations in
the RTT are even possible during a single TCP connection that lasts only
a few minutes. What this means to the sliding window algorithm is that
the timeout mechanism that triggers retransmissions must be adaptive.
(Certainly, the timeout for a point-to-point link must be a settable
parameter, but it is not necessary to adapt this timer for a particular
pair of nodes.)

A third difference is that packets may be reordered as they cross the
Internet, but this is not possible on a point-to-point link where the
first packet put into one end of the link must be the first to appear at
the other end. Packets that are slightly out of order do not cause a
problem since the sliding window algorithm can reorder packets correctly
using the sequence number. The real issue is how far out of order
packets can get or, said another way, how late a packet can arrive at
the destination. In the worst case, a packet can be delayed in the
Internet until the IP time to live (``TTL``) field expires, at which
time the packet is discarded (and hence there is no danger of it
arriving late). Knowing that IP throws packets away after their ``TTL``
expires, TCP assumes that each packet has a maximum lifetime. The exact
lifetime, known as the *maximum segment lifetime* (MSL), is an
engineering choice. The current recommended setting is 120 seconds. Keep
in mind that IP does not directly enforce this 120-second value; it is
simply a conservative estimate that TCP makes of how long a packet might
live in the Internet. The implication is significant—TCP has to be
prepared for very old packets to suddenly show up at the receiver,
potentially confusing the sliding window algorithm.

Fourth, the computers connected to a point-to-point link are generally
engineered to support the link. For example, if a link’s delay ×
bandwidth product is computed to be 8 KB—meaning that a window size is
selected to allow up to 8 KB of data to be unacknowledged at a given
time—then it is likely that the computers at either end of the link have
the ability to buffer up to 8 KB of data. Designing the system otherwise
would be silly. On the other hand, almost any kind of computer can be
connected to the Internet, making the amount of resources dedicated to
any one TCP connection highly variable, especially considering that any
one host can potentially support hundreds of TCP connections at the same
time. This means that TCP must include a mechanism that each side uses
to “learn” what resources (e.g., how much buffer space) the other side
is able to apply to the connection. This is the flow control issue.

Fifth, because the transmitting side of a directly connected link cannot
send any faster than the bandwidth of the link allows, and only one host
is pumping data into the link, it is not possible to unknowingly congest
the link. Said another way, the load on the link is visible in the form
of a queue of packets at the sender. In contrast, the sending side of a
TCP connection has no idea what links will be traversed to reach the
destination. For example, the sending machine might be directly
connected to a relatively fast Ethernet—and capable of sending data at a
rate of 10 Gbps—but somewhere out in the middle of the network, a
1.5-Mbps link must be traversed. And, to make matters worse, data being
generated by many different sources might be trying to traverse this
same slow link. This leads to the problem of network congestion.
Discussion of this topic is delayed until the next chapter.

We conclude this discussion of end-to-end issues by comparing TCP’s
approach to providing a reliable/ordered delivery service with the
approach used by virtual-circuit-based networks like the historically
important X.25 network. In TCP, the underlying IP network is assumed to
be unreliable and to deliver messages out of order; TCP uses the sliding
window algorithm on an end-to-end basis to provide reliable/ordered
delivery. In contrast, X.25 networks use the sliding window protocol
within the network, on a hop-by-hop basis. The assumption behind this
approach is that if messages are delivered reliably and in order between
each pair of nodes along the path between the source host and the
destination host, then the end-to-end service also guarantees
reliable/ordered delivery.

The problem with this latter approach is that a sequence of hop-by-hop
guarantees does not necessarily add up to an end-to-end guarantee.
First, if a heterogeneous link (say, an Ethernet) is added to one end of
the path, then there is no guarantee that this hop will preserve the
same service as the other hops. Second, just because the sliding window
protocol guarantees that messages are delivered correctly from node A to
node B, and then from node B to node C, it does not guarantee that
node B behaves perfectly. For example, network nodes have been known to
introduce errors into messages while transferring them from an input
buffer to an output buffer. They have also been known to accidentally
reorder messages. As a consequence of these small windows of
vulnerability, it is still necessary to provide true end-to-end checks
to guarantee reliable/ordered service, even though the lower levels of
the system also implement that functionality.

.. admonition::  Key Takeaway

   This discussion serves to illustrate one of the most important
   principles in system design—the *end-to-end argument*. In a nutshell,
   the end-to-end argument says that a function (in our example,
   providing reliable/ordered delivery) should not be provided in the
   lower levels of the system unless it can be completely and correctly
   implemented at that level. Therefore, this rule argues in favor of
   the TCP/IP approach. This rule is not absolute, however. It does
   allow for functions to be incompletely provided at a low level as a
   performance optimization. This is why it is perfectly consistent with
   the end-to-end argument to perform error detection (e.g., CRC) on a
   hop-by-hop basis; detecting and retransmitting a single corrupt
   packet across one hop is preferable to having to retransmit an entire
   file end-to-end.

Segment Format
--------------

TCP is a byte-oriented protocol, which means that the sender writes
bytes into a TCP connection and the receiver reads bytes out of the
TCP connection. Although “byte stream” describes the service TCP
offers to application processes, TCP does not, itself, transmit
individual bytes over the Internet. Instead, TCP on the source host
buffers enough bytes from the sending process to fill a reasonably
sized packet and then sends this packet to its peer on the destination
host. TCP on the destination host then empties the contents of the
packet into a receive buffer, and the receiving process reads from
this buffer at its leisure.  This situation is illustrated in
:numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-stream>`, which, for simplicity, shows
data flowing in only one direction. Remember that, in general, a
single TCP connection supports byte streams flowing in both
directions.
 
.. _fig-tcp-stream:
.. figure:: figures/f05-03-9780123850591.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   How TCP manages a byte stream.

The packets exchanged between TCP peers in :numref:`Figure %s
<fig-tcp-stream>` are called *segments*, since each one carries a
segment of the byte stream. Each TCP segment contains the header
schematically depicted in :numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-format>`. The
relevance of most of these fields will become apparent throughout this
section. For now, we simply introduce them.

.. _fig-tcp-format:
.. figure:: figures/f05-04-9780123850591.png
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

   TCP header format.

The ``SrcPort`` and ``DstPort`` fields identify the source and
destination ports, respectively, just as in UDP. These two fields, plus
the source and destination IP addresses, combine to uniquely identify
each TCP connection. That is, TCP’s demux key is given by the 4-tuple

.. code:: c

   (SrcPort, SrcIPAddr, DstPort, DstIPAddr)

Note that because TCP connections come and go, it is possible for a
connection between a particular pair of ports to be established, used to
send and receive data, and closed, and then at a later time for the same
pair of ports to be involved in a second connection. We sometimes refer
to this situation as two different *incarnations* of the same
connection.

The ``Acknowledgement``, ``SequenceNum``, and ``AdvertisedWindow``
fields are all involved in TCP’s sliding window algorithm. Because TCP
is a byte-oriented protocol, each byte of data has a sequence number.
The ``SequenceNum`` field contains the sequence number for the first
byte of data carried in that segment, and the ``Acknowledgement`` and
``AdvertisedWindow`` fields carry information about the flow of data
going in the other direction. To simplify our discussion, we ignore
the fact that data can flow in both directions, and we concentrate on
data that has a particular ``SequenceNum`` flowing in one direction
and ``Acknowledgement`` and ``AdvertisedWindow`` values flowing in the
opposite direction, as illustrated in :numref:`Figure %s
<fig-tcp-flow>`. The use of these three fields is described more fully
later in this chapter.

.. _fig-tcp-flow:
.. figure:: figures/f05-05-9780123850591.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   Simplified illustration (showing only one direction)
   of the TCP process, with data flow in one direction and ACKs in
   the other.

The 6-bit ``Flags`` field is used to relay control information between
TCP peers. The possible flags include ``SYN``, ``FIN``, ``RESET``,
``PUSH``, ``URG``, and ``ACK``. The ``SYN`` and ``FIN`` flags are used
when establishing and terminating a TCP connection, respectively. Their
use is described in a later section. The ``ACK`` flag is set any time
the ``Acknowledgement`` field is valid, implying that the receiver
should pay attention to it. The ``URG`` flag signifies that this segment
contains urgent data. When this flag is set, the ``UrgPtr`` field
indicates where the nonurgent data contained in this segment begins. The
urgent data is contained at the front of the segment body, up to and
including a value of ``UrgPtr`` bytes into the segment. The ``PUSH``
flag signifies that the sender invoked the push operation, which
indicates to the receiving side of TCP that it should notify the
receiving process of this fact. We discuss these last two features more
in a later section. Finally, the ``RESET`` flag signifies that the
receiver has become confused—for example, because it received a segment
it did not expect to receive—and so wants to abort the connection.

Finally, the ``Checksum`` field is used in exactly the same way as for
UDP—it is computed over the TCP header, the TCP data, and the
pseudoheader, which is made up of the source address, destination
address, and length fields from the IP header. The checksum is required
for TCP in both IPv4 and IPv6. Also, since the TCP header is of variable
length (options can be attached after the mandatory fields), a
``HdrLen`` field is included that gives the length of the header in
32-bit words. This field is also known as the ``Offset`` field, since it
measures the offset from the start of the packet to the start of the
data.

Connection Establishment and Termination
----------------------------------------

A TCP connection begins with a client (caller) doing an active open to a
server (callee). Assuming that the server had earlier done a passive
open, the two sides engage in an exchange of messages to establish the
connection. (Recall from Chapter 1 that a party wanting to initiate a
connection performs an active open, while a party willing to accept a
connection does a passive open.\ [#]_) Only after this connection
establishment phase is over do the two sides begin sending data.
Likewise, as soon as a participant is done sending data, it closes one
direction of the connection, which causes TCP to initiate a round of
connection termination messages. Notice that, while connection setup is
an asymmetric activity (one side does a passive open and the other side
does an active open), connection teardown is symmetric (each side has to
close the connection independently). Therefore, it is possible for one
side to have done a close, meaning that it can no longer send data, but
for the other side to keep the other half of the bidirectional
connection open and to continue sending data.

.. [#] To be more precise, TCP allows connection setup to be symmetric,
       with both sides trying to open the connection at the same time,
       but the common case is for one side to do an active open and the
       other side to do a passive open.

Three-Way Handshake
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The algorithm used by TCP to establish and terminate a connection is
called a *three-way handshake*. We first describe the basic algorithm
and then show how it is used by TCP. The three-way handshake involves
the exchange of three messages between the client and the server, as
illustrated by the timeline given in :numref:`Figure %s <fig-twh-timeline>`.

.. _fig-twh-timeline:
.. figure:: figures/f05-06-9780123850591.png
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

   Timeline for three-way handshake algorithm.

The idea is that two parties want to agree on a set of parameters,
which, in the case of opening a TCP connection, are the starting
sequence numbers the two sides plan to use for their respective byte
streams. In general, the parameters might be any facts that each side
wants the other to know about. First, the client (the active
participant) sends a segment to the server (the passive participant)
stating the initial sequence number it plans to use (``Flags`` =
``SYN``, ``SequenceNum`` = x). The server then responds with a single
segment that both acknowledges the client’s sequence number (``Flags =
ACK, Ack = x + 1``) and states its own beginning sequence number
(``Flags = SYN, SequenceNum = y``). That is, both the ``SYN`` and
``ACK`` bits are set in the ``Flags`` field of this second message.
Finally, the client responds with a third segment that acknowledges
the server’s sequence number (``Flags = ACK, Ack = y + 1``). The
reason why each side acknowledges a sequence number that is one larger
than the one sent is that the ``Acknowledgement`` field actually
identifies the “next sequence number expected,” thereby implicitly
acknowledging all earlier sequence numbers. Although not shown in this
timeline, a timer is scheduled for each of the first two segments, and
if the expected response is not received the segment is retransmitted.

You may be asking yourself why the client and server have to exchange
starting sequence numbers with each other at connection setup time. It
would be simpler if each side simply started at some “well-known”
sequence number, such as 0. In fact, the TCP specification requires that
each side of a connection select an initial starting sequence number at
random. The reason for this is to protect against two incarnations of
the same connection reusing the same sequence numbers too soon—that is,
while there is still a chance that a segment from an earlier incarnation
of a connection might interfere with a later incarnation of the
connection.

State-Transition Diagram
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TCP is complex enough that its specification includes a state-transition
diagram. A copy of this diagram is given in :numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-std>`.
This diagram shows only the states involved in opening a connection
(everything above ESTABLISHED) and in closing a connection (everything
below ESTABLISHED). Everything that goes on while a connection is
open—that is, the operation of the sliding window algorithm—is hidden in
the ESTABLISHED state.

.. _fig-tcp-std:
.. figure:: figures/f05-07-9780123850591.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

   TCP state-transition diagram.

TCP’s state-transition diagram is fairly easy to understand. Each box
denotes a state that one end of a TCP connection can find itself in. All
connections start in the CLOSED state. As the connection progresses, the
connection moves from state to state according to the arcs. Each arc is
labeled with a tag of the form *event/action*. Thus, if a connection is
in the LISTEN state and a SYN segment arrives (i.e., a segment with the
``SYN`` flag set), the connection makes a transition to the SYN_RCVD
state and takes the action of replying with an ``ACK+SYN`` segment.

Notice that two kinds of events trigger a state transition: (1) a
segment arrives from the peer (e.g., the event on the arc from LISTEN
to SYN_RCVD), or (2) the local application process invokes an
operation on TCP (e.g., the *active open* event on the arc from CLOSED
to SYN_SENT).  In other words, TCP’s state-transition diagram
effectively defines the *semantics* of both its peer-to-peer interface
and its service interface. The *syntax* of these two interfaces is
given by the segment format (as illustrated in :numref:`Figure %s
<fig-tcp-format>`) and by some application programming interface, such
as the socket API, respectively.

Now let’s trace the typical transitions taken through the diagram in
:numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-std>`. Keep in mind that at each end of the
connection, TCP makes different transitions from state to state. When
opening a connection, the server first invokes a passive open operation
on TCP, which causes TCP to move to the LISTEN state. At some later
time, the client does an active open, which causes its end of the
connection to send a SYN segment to the server and to move to the
SYN_SENT state. When the SYN segment arrives at the server, it moves to
the SYN_RCVD state and responds with a SYN+ACK segment. The arrival of
this segment causes the client to move to the ESTABLISHED state and to
send an ACK back to the server. When this ACK arrives, the server
finally moves to the ESTABLISHED state. In other words, we have just
traced the three-way handshake.

There are three things to notice about the connection establishment half
of the state-transition diagram. First, if the client’s ACK to the
server is lost, corresponding to the third leg of the three-way
handshake, then the connection still functions correctly. This is
because the client side is already in the ESTABLISHED state, so the
local application process can start sending data to the other end. Each
of these data segments will have the ``ACK`` flag set, and the correct
value in the ``Acknowledgement`` field, so the server will move to the
ESTABLISHED state when the first data segment arrives. This is actually
an important point about TCP—every segment reports what sequence number
the sender is expecting to see next, even if this repeats the same
sequence number contained in one or more previous segments.

The second thing to notice about the state-transition diagram is that
there is a funny transition out of the LISTEN state whenever the local
process invokes a *send* operation on TCP. That is, it is possible for a
passive participant to identify both ends of the connection (i.e.,
itself and the remote participant that it is willing to have connect to
it), and then for it to change its mind about waiting for the other side
and instead actively establish the connection. To the best of our
knowledge, this is a feature of TCP that no application process actually
takes advantage of.

The final thing to notice about the diagram is the arcs that are not
shown. Specifically, most of the states that involve sending a segment
to the other side also schedule a timeout that eventually causes the
segment to be present if the expected response does not happen. These
retransmissions are not depicted in the state-transition diagram. If
after several tries the expected response does not arrive, TCP gives up
and returns to the CLOSED state.

Turning our attention now to the process of terminating a connection,
the important thing to keep in mind is that the application process on
both sides of the connection must independently close its half of the
connection. If only one side closes the connection, then this means it
has no more data to send, but it is still available to receive data from
the other side. This complicates the state-transition diagram because it
must account for the possibility that the two sides invoke the *close*
operator at the same time, as well as the possibility that first one
side invokes close and then, at some later time, the other side invokes
close. Thus, on any one side there are three combinations of transitions
that get a connection from the ESTABLISHED state to the CLOSED state:

-  This side closes first: ESTABLISHED :math:`\rightarrow` FIN_WAIT_1 :math:`\rightarrow` FIN_WAIT_2 :math:`\rightarrow` TIME_WAIT :math:`\rightarrow` CLOSED.
	       
-  The other side closes first: ESTABLISHED :math:`\rightarrow` CLOSE_WAIT :math:`\rightarrow` LAST_ACK :math:`\rightarrow` CLOSED.

-  Both sides close at the same time: ESTABLISHED :math:`\rightarrow` FIN_WAIT_1 :math:`\rightarrow` CLOSING :math:`\rightarrow` TIME_WAIT :math:`\rightarrow` CLOSED.

There is actually a fourth, although rare, sequence of transitions that
leads to the CLOSED state; it follows the arc from FIN_WAIT_1 to
TIME_WAIT. We leave it as an exercise for you to figure out what
combination of circumstances leads to this fourth possibility.

The main thing to recognize about connection teardown is that a
connection in the TIME_WAIT state cannot move to the CLOSED state until
it has waited for two times the maximum amount of time an IP datagram
might live in the Internet (i.e., 120 seconds). The reason for this is
that, while the local side of the connection has sent an ACK in response
to the other side’s FIN segment, it does not know that the ACK was
successfully delivered. As a consequence, the other side might
retransmit its FIN segment, and this second FIN segment might be delayed
in the network. If the connection were allowed to move directly to the
CLOSED state, then another pair of application processes might come
along and open the same connection (i.e., use the same pair of port
numbers), and the delayed FIN segment from the earlier incarnation of
the connection would immediately initiate the termination of the later
incarnation of that connection.

Sliding Window Revisited
------------------------

We are now ready to discuss TCP’s variant of the sliding window
algorithm, which serves several purposes: (1) it guarantees the reliable
delivery of data, (2) it ensures that data is delivered in order, and
(3) it enforces flow control between the sender and the receiver. TCP’s
use of the sliding window algorithm is the same as at the link level in
the case of the first two of these three functions. Where TCP differs
from the link-level algorithm is that it folds the flow-control function
in as well. In particular, rather than having a fixed-size sliding
window, the receiver *advertises* a window size to the sender. This is
done using the ``AdvertisedWindow`` field in the TCP header. The sender
is then limited to having no more than a value of ``AdvertisedWindow``
bytes of unacknowledged data at any given time. The receiver selects a
suitable value for ``AdvertisedWindow`` based on the amount of memory
allocated to the connection for the purpose of buffering data. The idea
is to keep the sender from over-running the receiver’s buffer. We
discuss this at greater length below.

Reliable and Ordered Delivery
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To see how the sending and receiving sides of TCP interact with each
other to implement reliable and ordered delivery, consider the
situation illustrated in :numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-fc>`. TCP on the
sending side maintains a send buffer. This buffer is used to store
data that has been sent but not yet acknowledged, as well as data that
has been written by the sending application but not transmitted. On
the receiving side, TCP maintains a receive buffer. This buffer holds
data that arrives out of order, as well as data that is in the correct
order (i.e., there are no missing bytes earlier in the stream) but
that the application process has not yet had the chance to read.

.. _fig-tcp-fc:
.. figure:: figures/f05-08-9780123850591.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   Relationship between TCP send buffer (a) and receive
   buffer (b).

To make the following discussion simpler to follow, we initially ignore
the fact that both the buffers and the sequence numbers are of some
finite size and hence will eventually wrap around. Also, we do not
distinguish between a pointer into a buffer where a particular byte of
data is stored and the sequence number for that byte.

Looking first at the sending side, three pointers are maintained into
the send buffer, each with an obvious meaning: ``LastByteAcked``,
``LastByteSent``, and ``LastByteWritten``. Clearly,

::

   LastByteAcked <= LastByteSent

since the receiver cannot have acknowledged a byte that has not yet been
sent, and

::

   LastByteSent <= LastByteWritten

since TCP cannot send a byte that the application process has not yet
written. Also note that none of the bytes to the left of
``LastByteAcked`` need to be saved in the buffer because they have
already been acknowledged, and none of the bytes to the right of
``LastByteWritten`` need to be buffered because they have not yet been
generated.

A similar set of pointers (sequence numbers) are maintained on the
receiving side: ``LastByteRead``, ``NextByteExpected``, and
``LastByteRcvd``. The inequalities are a little less intuitive, however,
because of the problem of out-of-order delivery. The first relationship

::

   LastByteRead < NextByteExpected

is true because a byte cannot be read by the application until it is
received *and* all preceding bytes have also been received.
``NextByteExpected`` points to the byte immediately after the latest
byte to meet this criterion. Second,

::

   NextByteExpected <= LastByteRcvd + 1

since, if data has arrived in order, ``NextByteExpected`` points to the
byte after ``LastByteRcvd``, whereas if data has arrived out of order,
then ``NextByteExpected`` points to the start of the first gap in the
data, as in :numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-fc>`. Note that bytes to the left of
``LastByteRead`` need not be buffered because they have already been
read by the local application process, and bytes to the right of
``LastByteRcvd`` need not be buffered because they have not yet arrived.

Flow Control
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most of the above discussion is similar to that found in the standard
sliding window algorithm; the only real difference is that this time we
elaborated on the fact that the sending and receiving application
processes are filling and emptying their local buffer, respectively.
(The earlier discussion glossed over the fact that data arriving from an
upstream node was filling the send buffer and data being transmitted to
a downstream node was emptying the receive buffer.)

You should make sure you understand this much before proceeding because
now comes the point where the two algorithms differ more significantly.
In what follows, we reintroduce the fact that both buffers are of some
finite size, denoted ``MaxSendBuffer`` and ``MaxRcvBuffer``, although we
don’t worry about the details of how they are implemented. In other
words, we are only interested in the number of bytes being buffered, not
in where those bytes are actually stored.

Recall that in a sliding window protocol, the size of the window sets
the amount of data that can be sent without waiting for acknowledgment
from the receiver. Thus, the receiver throttles the sender by
advertising a window that is no larger than the amount of data that it
can buffer. Observe that TCP on the receive side must keep

::

   LastByteRcvd - LastByteRead <= MaxRcvBuffer

to avoid overflowing its buffer. It therefore advertises a window size
of

::

   AdvertisedWindow = MaxRcvBuffer - ((NextByteExpected - 1) - LastByteRead)

which represents the amount of free space remaining in its buffer. As
data arrives, the receiver acknowledges it as long as all the preceding
bytes have also arrived. In addition, ``LastByteRcvd`` moves to the
right (is incremented), meaning that the advertised window potentially
shrinks. Whether or not it shrinks depends on how fast the local
application process is consuming data. If the local process is reading
data just as fast as it arrives (causing ``LastByteRead`` to be
incremented at the same rate as ``LastByteRcvd``), then the advertised
window stays open (i.e., ``AdvertisedWindow = MaxRcvBuffer``). If,
however, the receiving process falls behind, perhaps because it performs
a very expensive operation on each byte of data that it reads, then the
advertised window grows smaller with every segment that arrives, until
it eventually goes to 0.

TCP on the send side must then adhere to the advertised window it gets
from the receiver. This means that at any given time, it must ensure
that

::

   LastByteSent - LastByteAcked <= AdvertisedWindow

Said another way, the sender computes an *effective* window that limits
how much data it can send:

::

   EffectiveWindow = AdvertisedWindow - (LastByteSent - LastByteAcked)

Clearly, ``EffectiveWindow`` must be greater than 0 before the source
can send more data. It is possible, therefore, that a segment arrives
acknowledging x bytes, thereby allowing the sender to increment
``LastByteAcked`` by x, but because the receiving process was not
reading any data, the advertised window is now x bytes smaller than the
time before. In such a situation, the sender would be able to free
buffer space, but not to send any more data.

All the while this is going on, the send side must also make sure that
the local application process does not overflow the send buffer—that is,

::

   LastByteWritten - LastByteAcked <= MaxSendBuffer

If the sending process tries to write y bytes to TCP, but

::

   (LastByteWritten - LastByteAcked) + y > MaxSendBuffer

then TCP blocks the sending process and does not allow it to generate
more data.

It is now possible to understand how a slow receiving process ultimately
stops a fast sending process. First, the receive buffer fills up, which
means the advertised window shrinks to 0. An advertised window of 0
means that the sending side cannot transmit any data, even though data
it has previously sent has been successfully acknowledged. Finally, not
being able to transmit any data means that the send buffer fills up,
which ultimately causes TCP to block the sending process. As soon as the
receiving process starts to read data again, the receive-side TCP is
able to open its window back up, which allows the send-side TCP to
transmit data out of its buffer. When this data is eventually
acknowledged, ``LastByteAcked`` is incremented, the buffer space holding
this acknowledged data becomes free, and the sending process is
unblocked and allowed to proceed.

There is only one remaining detail that must be resolved—how does the
sending side know that the advertised window is no longer 0? As
mentioned above, TCP *always* sends a segment in response to a received
data segment, and this response contains the latest values for the
``Acknowledge`` and ``AdvertisedWindow`` fields, even if these values
have not changed since the last time they were sent. The problem is
this. Once the receive side has advertised a window size of 0, the
sender is not permitted to send any more data, which means it has no way
to discover that the advertised window is no longer 0 at some time in
the future. TCP on the receive side does not spontaneously send nondata
segments; it only sends them in response to an arriving data segment.

TCP deals with this situation as follows. Whenever the other side
advertises a window size of 0, the sending side persists in sending a
segment with 1 byte of data every so often. It knows that this data will
probably not be accepted, but it tries anyway, because each of these
1-byte segments triggers a response that contains the current advertised
window. Eventually, one of these 1-byte probes triggers a response that
reports a nonzero advertised window.

Note that these 1-byte messages are called *Zero Window Probes* and in
practice they are sent every 5 to 60 seconds. As for what single byte of
data to send in the probe: it’s the next byte of actual data just
outside the window. (It has to be real data in case it’s accepted by the
receiver.)

.. admonition::  Key Takeaway

   Note that the reason the sending side periodically sends this probe
   segment is that TCP is designed to make the receive side as simple as
   possible—it simply responds to segments from the sender, and it never
   initiates any activity on its own. This is an example of a
   well-recognized (although not universally applied) protocol design
   rule, which, for lack of a better name, we call the *smart sender/
   dumb receiver* rule. Recall that we saw another example of this rule
   when we discussed the use of NAKs in sliding window algorithm.

Protecting Against Wraparound
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This subsection and the next consider the size of the ``SequenceNum``
and ``AdvertisedWindow`` fields and the implications of their sizes on
TCP’s correctness and performance. TCP’s ``SequenceNum`` field is
32 bits long, and its ``AdvertisedWindow`` field is 16 bits long,
meaning that TCP has easily satisfied the requirement of the sliding
window algorithm that the sequence number space be twice as big as the
window size: 2\ :sup:`32` >> 2 × 2\ :sup:`16`. However, this
requirement is not the interesting thing about these two fields.
Consider each field in turn.

The relevance of the 32-bit sequence number space is that the sequence
number used on a given connection might wrap around—a byte with
sequence number S could be sent at one time, and then at a later time
a second byte with the same sequence number S might be sent. Once
again, we assume that packets cannot survive in the Internet for
longer than the recommended MSL. Thus, we currently need to make sure
that the sequence number does not wrap around within a 120-second
period of time. Whether or not this happens depends on how fast data
can be transmitted over the Internet—that is, how fast the 32-bit
sequence number space can be consumed. (This discussion assumes that
we are trying to consume the sequence number space as fast as
possible, but of course we will be if we are doing our job of keeping
the pipe full.) :numref:`Table %s <tab-eqnum>` shows how long it takes
for the sequence number to wrap around on networks with various
bandwidths.

.. _tab-eqnum:
.. table::  Time Until 32-Bit Sequence Number Space Wraps Around.
   :align: center
   :widths: auto

   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | Bandwidth                | Time until Wraparound |
   +==========================+=======================+
   | T1 (1.5 Mbps)            | 6.4 hours             |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | T3 (45 Mbps)             | 13 minutes            |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | Fast Ethernet (100 Mbps) | 6 minutes             |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | OC-3 (155 Mbps)          | 4 minutes             |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | OC-48 (2.5 Gbps)         | 14 seconds            |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | OC-192 (10 Gbps)         | 3 seconds             |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+
   | 10GigE (10 Gbps)         | 3 seconds             |
   +--------------------------+-----------------------+

As you can see, the 32-bit sequence number space is adequate at modest
bandwidths, but given that OC-192 links are now common in the Internet
backbone, and that most servers now come with 10Gig Ethernet (or 10
Gbps) interfaces, we’re now well-past the point where 32 bits is too
small. Fortunately, the IETF has worked out an extension to TCP that
effectively extends the sequence number space to protect against the
sequence number wrapping around. This and related extensions are
described in a later section.

Keeping the Pipe Full
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The relevance of the 16-bit ``AdvertisedWindow`` field is that it must
be big enough to allow the sender to keep the pipe full. Clearly, the
receiver is free to not open the window as large as the
``AdvertisedWindow`` field allows; we are interested in the situation in
which the receiver has enough buffer space to handle as much data as the
largest possible ``AdvertisedWindow`` allows.

In this case, it is not just the network bandwidth but the delay x
bandwidth product that dictates how big the ``AdvertisedWindow`` field
needs to be—the window needs to be opened far enough to allow a full
delay × bandwidth product’s worth of data to be transmitted. Assuming an
RTT of 100 ms (a typical number for a cross-country connection in the
United States), :numref:`Table %s <tab-adv-win>` gives the delay × bandwidth
product for several network technologies.

.. _tab-adv-win:
.. table::  Required Window Size for 100-ms RTT
   :align: center
   :widths: auto   

   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | Bandwidth                | Delay × Bandwidth Product |
   +==========================+===========================+
   | T1 (1.5 Mbps)            | 18 KB                     |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | T3 (45 Mbps)             | 549 KB                    |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | Fast Ethernet (100 Mbps) | 1.2 MB                    |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | OC-3 (155 Mbps)          | 1.8 MB                    |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | OC-48 (2.5 Gbps)         | 29.6 MB                   |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | OC-192 (10 Gbps)         | 118.4 MB                  |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+
   | 10GigE (10 Gbps)         | 118.4 MB                  |
   +--------------------------+---------------------------+

As you can see, TCP’s ``AdvertisedWindow`` field is in even worse shape
than its ``SequenceNum`` field—it is not big enough to handle even a T3
connection across the continental United States, since a 16-bit field
allows us to advertise a window of only 64 KB. The very same TCP
extension mentioned above provides a mechanism for effectively
increasing the size of the advertised window.

Triggering Transmission
-----------------------

We next consider a surprisingly subtle issue: how TCP decides to
transmit a segment. As described earlier, TCP supports a byte-stream
abstraction; that is, application programs write bytes into the stream,
and it is up to TCP to decide that it has enough bytes to send a
segment. What factors govern this decision?

If we ignore the possibility of flow control—that is, we assume the
window is wide open, as would be the case when a connection first
starts—then TCP has three mechanisms to trigger the transmission of a
segment. First, TCP maintains a variable, typically called the *maximum
segment size* (``MSS``), and it sends a segment as soon as it has
collected ``MSS`` bytes from the sending process. ``MSS`` is usually set
to the size of the largest segment TCP can send without causing the
local IP to fragment. That is, ``MSS`` is set to the maximum
transmission unit (MTU) of the directly connected network, minus the
size of the TCP and IP headers. The second thing that triggers TCP to
transmit a segment is that the sending process has explicitly asked it
to do so. Specifically, TCP supports a *push* operation, and the sending
process invokes this operation to effectively flush the buffer of unsent
bytes. The final trigger for transmitting a segment is that a timer
fires; the resulting segment contains as many bytes as are currently
buffered for transmission. However, as we will soon see, this “timer”
isn’t exactly what you expect.

Silly Window Syndrome
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Of course, we can’t just ignore flow control, which plays an obvious
role in throttling the sender. If the sender has ``MSS`` bytes of data
to send and the window is open at least that much, then the sender
transmits a full segment. Suppose, however, that the sender is
accumulating bytes to send, but the window is currently closed. Now
suppose an ACK arrives that effectively opens the window enough for the
sender to transmit, say, ``MSS/2`` bytes. Should the sender transmit a
half-full segment or wait for the window to open to a full ``MSS``? The
original specification was silent on this point, and early
implementations of TCP decided to go ahead and transmit a half-full
segment. After all, there is no telling how long it will be before the
window opens further.

It turns out that the strategy of aggressively taking advantage of any
available window leads to a situation now known as the *silly window
syndrome*. :numref:`Figure %s <fig-sillywindow>` helps visualize what
happens.  If you think of a TCP stream as a conveyor belt with “full”
containers (data segments) going in one direction and empty containers
(ACKs) going in the reverse direction, then ``MSS``-sized segments
correspond to large containers and 1-byte segments correspond to very
small containers. As long as the sender is sending ``MSS``-sized
segments and the receiver ACKs at least one ``MSS`` of data at a time,
everything is good (:numref:`Figure %s(a) <fig-sillywindow>`). But,
what if the receiver has to reduce the window, so that at some time
the sender can’t send a full ``MSS`` of data? If the sender
aggressively fills a smaller-than-\ ``MSS`` empty container as soon as
it arrives, then the receiver will ACK that smaller number of bytes,
and hence the small container introduced into the system remains in
the system indefinitely.  That is, it is immediately filled and
emptied at each end and is never coalesced with adjacent containers to
create larger containers, as in :numref:`Figure %s(b)
<fig-sillywindow>`. This scenario was discovered when early
implementations of TCP regularly found themselves filling the network
with tiny segments.

.. _fig-sillywindow:
.. figure:: figures/f05-09-9780123850591.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   Silly window syndrome. (a) As long as the sender sends
   MSS-sized segments and the receiver ACKs one MSS at a time, the
   system works smoothly. (b) As soon as the sender sends less than
   one MSS, or the receiver ACKs less than one MSS, a small
   "container" enters the system and continues to circulate.

Note that the silly window syndrome is only a problem when either the
sender transmits a small segment or the receiver opens the window a
small amount. If neither of these happens, then the small container is
never introduced into the stream. It’s not possible to outlaw sending
small segments; for example, the application might do a *push* after
sending a single byte. It is possible, however, to keep the receiver
from introducing a small container (i.e., a small open window). The rule
is that after advertising a zero window the receiver must wait for space
equal to an ``MSS`` before it advertises an open window.

Since we can’t eliminate the possibility of a small container being
introduced into the stream, we also need mechanisms to coalesce them.
The receiver can do this by delaying ACKs—sending one combined ACK
rather than multiple smaller ones—but this is only a partial solution
because the receiver has no way of knowing how long it is safe to delay
waiting either for another segment to arrive or for the application to
read more data (thus opening the window). The ultimate solution falls to
the sender, which brings us back to our original issue: When does the
TCP sender decide to transmit a segment?

Nagle’s Algorithm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returning to the TCP sender, if there is data to send but the window is
open less than ``MSS``, then we may want to wait some amount of time
before sending the available data, but the question is how long? If we
wait too long, then we hurt interactive applications like Telnet. If we
don’t wait long enough, then we risk sending a bunch of tiny packets and
falling into the silly window syndrome. The answer is to introduce a
timer and to transmit when the timer expires.

While we could use a clock-based timer—for example, one that fires
every 100 ms—Nagle introduced an elegant *self-clocking* solution. The
idea is that as long as TCP has any data in flight, the sender will
eventually receive an ACK. This ACK can be treated like a timer
firing, triggering the transmission of more data. Nagle’s algorithm
provides a simple, unified rule for deciding when to transmit:

::

   When the application produces data to send
       if both the available data and the window >= MSS
           send a full segment
       else
           if there is unACKed data in flight
               buffer the new data until an ACK arrives
           else
               send all the new data now

In other words, it’s always OK to send a full segment if the window
allows. It’s also all right to immediately send a small amount of data
if there are currently no segments in transit, but if there is anything
in flight the sender must wait for an ACK before transmitting the next
segment. Thus, an interactive application like Telnet that continually
writes one byte at a time will send data at a rate of one segment per
RTT. Some segments will contain a single byte, while others will contain
as many bytes as the user was able to type in one round-trip time.
Because some applications cannot afford such a delay for each write it
does to a TCP connection, the socket interface allows the application to
turn off Nagel’s algorithm by setting the ``TCP_NODELAY`` option.
Setting this option means that data is transmitted as soon as possible.

Adaptive Retransmission
-----------------------

Because TCP guarantees the reliable delivery of data, it retransmits
each segment if an ACK is not received in a certain period of time. TCP
sets this timeout as a function of the RTT it expects between the two
ends of the connection. Unfortunately, given the range of possible RTTs
between any pair of hosts in the Internet, as well as the variation in
RTT between the same two hosts over time, choosing an appropriate
timeout value is not that easy. To address this problem, TCP uses an
adaptive retransmission mechanism. We now describe this mechanism and
how it has evolved over time as the Internet community has gained more
experience using TCP.

Original Algorithm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We begin with a simple algorithm for computing a timeout value between a
pair of hosts. This is the algorithm that was originally described in
the TCP specification—and the following description presents it in those
terms—but it could be used by any end-to-end protocol.

The idea is to keep a running average of the RTT and then to compute
the timeout as a function of this RTT. Specifically, every time TCP
sends a data segment, it records the time. When an ACK for that
segment arrives, TCP reads the time again, and then takes the
difference between these two times as a ``SampleRTT``. TCP then
computes an ``EstimatedRTT`` as a weighted average between the
previous estimate and this new sample. That is,

::

   EstimatedRTT = alpha x EstimatedRTT + (1 - alpha) x SampleRTT

The parameter ``alpha`` is selected to *smooth* the
``EstimatedRTT``. A small ``alpha`` tracks changes in the RTT but is
perhaps too heavily influenced by temporary fluctuations. On the other
hand, a large ``alpha`` is more stable but perhaps not quick enough to
adapt to real changes. The original TCP specification recommended a
setting of ``alpha`` between 0.8 and 0.9. TCP then uses
``EstimatedRTT`` to compute the timeout in a rather conservative way:

::

   TimeOut = 2 x EstimatedRTT

Karn/Partridge Algorithm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After several years of use on the Internet, a rather obvious flaw was
discovered in this simple algorithm. The problem was that an ACK does
not really acknowledge a transmission; it actually acknowledges the
receipt of data. In other words, whenever a segment is retransmitted
and then an ACK arrives at the sender, it is impossible to determine
if this ACK should be associated with the first or the second
transmission of the segment for the purpose of measuring the sample
RTT. It is necessary to know which transmission to associate it with
so as to compute an accurate ``SampleRTT``. As illustrated in
:numref:`Figure %s <fig-tcp-karn>`, if you assume that the ACK is for
the original transmission but it was really for the second, then the
``SampleRTT`` is too large (a); if you assume that the ACK is for the
second transmission but it was actually for the first, then the
``SampleRTT`` is too small (b).

.. _fig-tcp-karn:
.. figure:: figures/f05-10-9780123850591.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   Associating the ACK with (a) original transmission
   versus (b) retransmission.

The solution, which was proposed in 1987, is surprisingly simple.
Whenever TCP retransmits a segment, it stops taking samples of the RTT;
it only measures ``SampleRTT`` for segments that have been sent only
once. This solution is known as the Karn/Partridge algorithm, after its
inventors. Their proposed fix also includes a second small change to
TCP’s timeout mechanism. Each time TCP retransmits, it sets the next
timeout to be twice the last timeout, rather than basing it on the last
``EstimatedRTT``. That is, Karn and Partridge proposed that TCP use
exponential backoff, similar to what the Ethernet does. The motivation
for using exponential backoff is simple: Congestion is the most likely
cause of lost segments, meaning that the TCP source should not react too
aggressively to a timeout. In fact, the more times the connection times
out, the more cautious the source should become. We will see this idea
again, embodied in a much more sophisticated mechanism, in the next
chapter.

Jacobson/Karels Algorithm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Karn/Partridge algorithm was introduced at a time when the Internet
was suffering from high levels of network congestion. Their approach was
designed to fix some of the causes of that congestion, but, although it
was an improvement, the congestion was not eliminated. The following
year (1988), two other researchers—Jacobson and Karels—proposed a more
drastic change to TCP to battle congestion. The bulk of that proposed
change is described in the next chapter. Here, we focus on the aspect of
that proposal that is related to deciding when to time out and
retransmit a segment.

As an aside, it should be clear how the timeout mechanism is related to
congestion—if you time out too soon, you may unnecessarily retransmit a
segment, which only adds to the load on the network. The other reason
for needing an accurate timeout value is that a timeout is taken to
imply congestion, which triggers a congestion-control mechanism.
Finally, note that there is nothing about the Jacobson/Karels timeout
computation that is specific to TCP. It could be used by any end-to-end
protocol.

The main problem with the original computation is that it does not take
the variance of the sample RTTs into account. Intuitively, if the
variation among samples is small, then the ``EstimatedRTT`` can be
better trusted and there is no reason for multiplying this estimate by 2
to compute the timeout. On the other hand, a large variance in the
samples suggests that the timeout value should not be too tightly
coupled to the ``EstimatedRTT``.

In the new approach, the sender measures a new ``SampleRTT`` as before.
It then folds this new sample into the timeout calculation as follows:

::

   Difference = SampleRTT - EstimatedRTT
   EstimatedRTT = EstimatedRTT + ( delta x Difference)
   Deviation = Deviation + delta (|Difference| - Deviation)

where ``delta`` and delta are fractions between 0 and 1. That is, we
calculate both the mean RTT and the variation in that mean.

TCP then computes the timeout value as a function of both
``EstimatedRTT`` and ``Deviation`` as follows:

::

   TimeOut = mu x EstimatedRTT + phi x Deviation

where based on experience, ``mu`` is typically set to 1 and ``phi`` is
set to 4.  Thus, when the variance is small, ``TimeOut`` is close to
``EstimatedRTT``; a large variance causes the ``Deviation`` term to
dominate the calculation.

Implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are two items of note regarding the implementation of timeouts in
TCP. The first is that it is possible to implement the calculation for
``EstimatedRTT`` and ``Deviation`` without using floating-point
arithmetic. Instead, the whole calculation is scaled by 2\ :sup:`n`, 
with delta selected to be 1/2\ :sup:`n`. This allows us to do integer 
arithmetic, implementing multiplicationand division using shifts, 
thereby achieving higher performance. The resulting calculation is given 
by the following code fragment, where n=3
(i.e., ``delta = 1/8``). Note that ``EstimatedRTT`` and ``Deviation`` are
stored in their scaled-up forms, while the value of ``SampleRTT`` at the
start of the code and of ``TimeOut`` at the end are real, unscaled
values. If you find the code hard to follow, you might want to try
plugging some real numbers into it and verifying that it gives the same
results as the equations above.

::

   {
       SampleRTT -= (EstimatedRTT >> 3);
       EstimatedRTT += SampleRTT;
       if (SampleRTT < 0)
           SampleRTT = -SampleRTT;
       SampleRTT -= (Deviation >> 3);
       Deviation += SampleRTT;
       TimeOut = (EstimatedRTT >> 3) + (Deviation >> 1);
   }

The second point of note is that the Jacobson/Karels algorithm is only
as good as the clock used to read the current time. On typical Unix
implementations at the time, the clock granularity was as large as
500 ms, which is significantly larger than the average cross-country RTT
of somewhere between 100 and 200 ms. To make matters worse, the Unix
implementation of TCP only checked to see if a timeout should happen
every time this 500-ms clock ticked and would only take a sample of the
round-trip time once per RTT. The combination of these two factors could
mean that a timeout would happen 1 second after the segment was
transmitted. Once again, the extensions to TCP include a mechanism that
makes this RTT calculation a bit more precise.

All of the retransmission algorithms we have discussed are based on
acknowledgment timeouts, which indicate that a segment has probably been
lost. Note that a timeout does not, however, tell the sender whether any
segments it sent after the lost segment were successfully received. This
is because TCP acknowledgments are cumulative; they identify only the
last segment that was received without any preceding gaps. The reception
of segments that occur after a gap grows more frequent as faster
networks lead to larger windows. If ACKs also told the sender which
subsequent segments, if any, had been received, then the sender could be
more intelligent about which segments it retransmits, draw better
conclusions about the state of congestion, and make better RTT
estimates. A TCP extension supporting this is described in a later
section.

.. admonition::  Key Takeaway

   There is one other point to make about computing timeouts. It is a
   surprisingly tricky business, so much so, that there is an entire RFC
   dedicated to the topic: `RFC
   6298 <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6298>`__. The takeaway is that
   sometimes fully specifying a protocol involves so much minutiae that
   the line between specification and implementation becomes blurred.
   That has happened more than once with TCP, causing some to argue that
   “the implementation **is** the specification.” But that’s not
   necessarily a bad thing, since by another name, what we’ve just
   described is open source software.

Record Boundaries
-----------------

Since TCP is a byte-stream protocol, the number of bytes written by the
sender are not necessarily the same as the number of bytes read by the
receiver. For example, the application might write 8 bytes, then
2 bytes, then 20 bytes to a TCP connection, while on the receiving side
the application reads 5 bytes at a time inside a loop that iterates 6
times. TCP does not interject record boundaries between the 8th and 9th
bytes, nor between the 10th and 11th bytes. This is in contrast to a
message-oriented protocol, such as UDP, in which the message that is
sent is exactly the same length as the message that is received.

Even though TCP is a byte-stream protocol, it has two different features
that can be used by the sender to insert record boundaries into this
byte stream, thereby informing the receiver how to break the stream of
bytes into records. (Being able to mark record boundaries is useful, for
example, in many database applications.) Both of these features were
originally included in TCP for completely different reasons; they have
only come to be used for this purpose over time.

The first mechanism is the urgent data feature, as implemented by the
``URG`` flag and the ``UrgPtr`` field in the TCP header. Originally, the
urgent data mechanism was designed to allow the sending application to
send *out-of-band* data to its peer. By “out of band” we mean data that
is separate from the normal flow of data (e.g., a command to interrupt
an operation already under way). This out-of-band data was identified in
the segment using the ``UrgPtr`` field and was to be delivered to the
receiving process as soon as it arrived, even if that meant delivering
it before data with an earlier sequence number. Over time, however, this
feature has not been used, so instead of signifying “urgent” data, it
has come to be used to signify “special” data, such as a record marker.
This use has developed because, as with the push operation, TCP on the
receiving side must inform the application that urgent data has arrived.
That is, the urgent data in itself is not important. It is the fact that
the sending process can effectively send a signal to the receiver that
is important.

The second mechanism for inserting end-of-record markers into a byte is
the *push* operation. Originally, this mechanism was designed to allow
the sending process to tell TCP that it should send (flush) whatever
bytes it had collected to its peer. The *push* operation can be used to
implement record boundaries because the specification says that TCP must
send whatever data it has buffered at the source when the application
says push, and, optionally, TCP at the destination notifies the
application whenever an incoming segment has the PUSH flag set. If the
receiving side supports this option (the socket interface does not),
then the push operation can be used to break the TCP stream into
records.

Of course, the application program is always free to insert record
boundaries without any assistance from TCP. For example, it can send a
field that indicates the length of a record that is to follow, or it can
insert its own record boundary markers into the data stream.

TCP Extensions
--------------

We have mentioned at four different points in this section that there
are now extensions to TCP that help to mitigate some problem that TCP
faced as the underlying network got faster. These extensions are
designed to have as small an impact on TCP as possible. In particular,
they are realized as options that can be added to the TCP header. (We
glossed over this point earlier, but the reason why the TCP header has a
``HdrLen`` field is that the header can be of variable length; the
variable part of the TCP header contains the options that have been
added.) The significance of adding these extensions as options rather
than changing the core of the TCP header is that hosts can still
communicate using TCP even if they do not implement the options. Hosts
that do implement the optional extensions, however, can take advantage
of them. The two sides agree that they will use the options during TCP’s
connection establishment phase.

The first extension helps to improve TCP’s timeout mechanism. Instead of
measuring the RTT using a coarse-grained event, TCP can read the actual
system clock when it is about to send a segment, and put this time—think
of it as a 32-bit *timestamp*\ —in the segment’s header. The receiver then
echoes this timestamp back to the sender in its acknowledgment, and the
sender subtracts this timestamp from the current time to measure the
RTT. In essence, the timestamp option provides a convenient place for
TCP to store the record of when a segment was transmitted; it stores the
time in the segment itself. Note that the endpoints in the connection do
not need synchronized clocks, since the timestamp is written and read at
the same end of the connection.

The second extension addresses the problem of TCP’s 32-bit
``SequenceNum`` field wrapping around too soon on a high-speed network.
Rather than define a new 64-bit sequence number field, TCP uses the
32-bit timestamp just described to effectively extend the sequence
number space. In other words, TCP decides whether to accept or reject a
segment based on a 64-bit identifier that has the ``SequenceNum`` field
in the low-order 32 bits and the timestamp in the high-order 32 bits.
Since the timestamp is always increasing, it serves to distinguish
between two different incarnations of the same sequence number. Note
that the timestamp is being used in this setting only to protect against
wraparound; it is not treated as part of the sequence number for the
purpose of ordering or acknowledging data.

The third extension allows TCP to advertise a larger window, thereby
allowing it to fill larger delay × bandwidth pipes that are made
possible by high-speed networks. This extension involves an option that
defines a *scaling factor* for the advertised window. That is, rather
than interpreting the number that appears in the ``AdvertisedWindow``
field as indicating how many bytes the sender is allowed to have
unacknowledged, this option allows the two sides of TCP to agree that
the ``AdvertisedWindow`` field counts larger chunks (e.g., how many
16-byte units of data the sender can have unacknowledged). In other
words, the window scaling option specifies how many bits each side
should left-shift the ``AdvertisedWindow`` field before using its
contents to compute an effective window.

The fourth extension allows TCP to augment its cumulative acknowledgment
with selective acknowledgments of any additional segments that have been
received but aren’t contiguous with all previously received segments.
This is the *selective acknowledgment*, or *SACK*, option. When the SACK
option is used, the receiver continues to acknowledge segments
normally—the meaning of the ``Acknowledge`` field does not change—but it
also uses optional fields in the header to acknowledge any additional
blocks of received data. This allows the sender to retransmit just the
segments that are missing according to the selective acknowledgment.

Without SACK, there are only two reasonable strategies for a sender. The
pessimistic strategy responds to a timeout by retransmitting not just
the segment that timed out, but any segments transmitted subsequently.
In effect, the pessimistic strategy assumes the worst: that all those
segments were lost. The disadvantage of the pessimistic strategy is that
it may unnecessarily retransmit segments that were successfully received
the first time. The other strategy is the optimistic strategy, which
responds to a timeout by retransmitting only the segment that timed out.
In effect, the optimistic approach assumes the rosiest scenario: that
only the one segment has been lost. The disadvantage of the optimistic
strategy is that it is very slow, unnecessarily, when a series of
consecutive segments has been lost, as might happen when there is
congestion. It is slow because each segment’s loss is not discovered
until the sender receives an ACK for its retransmission of the previous
segment. So it consumes one RTT per segment until it has retransmitted
all the segments in the lost series. With the SACK option, a better
strategy is available to the sender: retransmit just the segments that
fill the gaps between the segments that have been selectively
acknowledged.

These extensions, by the way, are not the full story. We’ll see some
more extensions in the next chapter when we look at how TCP handles
congestion. The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) keeps track
of all the options that are defined for TCP (and for many other Internet
protocols). See the references at the end of the chapter for a link to
IANA’s protocol number registry.

Performance
-----------

Recall that Chapter 1 introduced the two quantitative metrics by which
network performance is evaluated: latency and throughput. As mentioned
in that discussion, these metrics are influenced not only by the
underlying hardware (e.g., propagation delay and link bandwidth) but
also by software overheads. Now that we have a complete software-based
protocol graph available to us that includes alternative transport
protocols, we can discuss how to meaningfully measure its performance.
The importance of such measurements is that they represent the
performance seen by application programs.

.. _fig-experiment:
.. figure:: figures/f05-11-9780123850591.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   Measured system: Two Linux workstations and a pair of
   Gbps Ethernet links.

We begin, as any report of experimental results should, by describing
our experimental method. This includes the apparatus used in the
experiments; in this case, each workstation has a pair of dual CPU
2.4-GHz Xeon processors running Linux. In order to enable speeds above
1 Gbps, a pair of Ethernet adaptors (labeled NIC, for network
interface card) are used on each machine. The Ethernet spans a single
machine room so propagation is not an issue, making this a measure of
processor/software overheads. A test program running on top of the
socket interface simply tries to transfer data as quickly as possible
from one machine to the other. :numref:`Figure %s <fig-experiment>`
illustrates the setup.

You may notice that this experimental setup is not especially bleeding
edge in terms of the hardware or link speed. The point of this section
is not to show how fast a particular protocol can run, but to illustrate
the general methodology for measuring and reporting protocol
performance.

The throughput test is performed for a variety of message sizes using
a standard benchmarking tool called TTCP. The results of the
throughput test are given in :numref:`Figure %s <fig-xput>`. The key
thing to notice in this graph is that throughput improves as the
messages get larger. This makes sense—each message involves a certain
amount of overhead, so a larger message means that this overhead is
amortized over more bytes. The throughput curve flattens off above
1 KB, at which point the per-message overhead becomes insignificant
when compared to the large number of bytes that the protocol stack has
to process.

.. _fig-xput:
.. figure:: figures/f05-12-9780123850591.png
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

   Measured throughput using TCP, for various message
   sizes.

It’s worth noting that the maximum throughput is less than 2 Gbps, the
available link speed in this setup. Further testing and analysis of
results would be needed to figure out where the bottleneck is (or if
there is more than one). For example, looking at CPU load might give an
indication of whether the CPU is the bottleneck or whether memory
bandwidth, adaptor performance, or some other issue is to blame.

We also note that the network in this test is basically “perfect.” It
has almost no delay or loss, so the only factors affecting performance
are the TCP implementation and the workstation hardware and software. By
contrast, most of the time we deal with networks that are far from
perfect, notably our bandwidth-constrained, last-mile links and
loss-prone wireless links. Before we can fully appreciate how these
links affect TCP performance, we need to understand how TCP deals with
*congestion*, which is the topic of the next chapter.

At various times in the history of networking, the steadily increasing
speed of network links has threatened to run ahead of what could be
delivered to applications. For example, a large research effort was
begun in the United States in 1989 to build “gigabit networks,” where
the goal was not only to build links and switches that could run at
1Gbps or higher but also to deliver that throughput all the way to a
single application process. There were some real problems (e.g., network
adaptors, workstation architectures, and operating systems all had to be
designed with network-to-application throughput in mind) and also some
perceived problems that turned out to be not so serious. High on the
list of such problems was the concern that existing transport protocols,
TCP in particular, might not be up to the challenge of gigabit
operation.

As it turns out, TCP has done well keeping up with the increasing
demands of high-speed networks and applications. One of the most
important factors was the introduction of window scaling to deal with
larger bandwidth-delay products. However, there is often a big
difference between the theoretical performance of TCP and what is
achieved in practice. Relatively simple problems like copying the data
more times than necessary as it passes from network adaptor to
application can drive down performance, as can insufficient buffer
memory when the bandwidth-delay product is large. And the dynamics of
TCP are complex enough (as will become even more apparent in the next
chapter) that subtle interactions among network behavior, application
behavior, and the TCP protocol itself can dramatically alter
performance.

For our purposes, it’s worth noting that TCP continues to perform very
well as network speeds increase, and when it runs up against some limit
(normally related to congestion, increasing bandwidth-delay products, or
both), researchers rush in to find solutions. We’ve seen some of those
in this chapter, and we’ll see some more in the next.

Alternative Design Choices (SCTP, QUIC)
---------------------------------------

Although TCP has proven to be a robust protocol that satisfies the needs
of a wide range of applications, the design space for transport
protocols is quite large. TCP is by no means the only valid point in
that design space. We conclude our discussion of TCP by considering
alternative design choices. While we offer an explanation for why TCP’s
designers made the choices they did, we observe that other protocols
exist that have made other choices, and more such protocols may appear
in the future.

First, we have suggested from the very first chapter of this book that
there are at least two interesting classes of transport protocols:
stream-oriented protocols like TCP and request/reply protocols like RPC.
In other words, we have implicitly divided the design space in half and
placed TCP squarely in the stream-oriented half of the world. We could
further divide the stream-oriented protocols into two groups—reliable
and unreliable—with the former containing TCP and the latter being more
suitable for interactive video applications that would rather drop a
frame than incur the delay associated with a retransmission.

This exercise in building a transport protocol taxonomy is interesting
and could be continued in greater and greater detail, but the world
isn’t as black and white as we might like. Consider the suitability of
TCP as a transport protocol for request/reply applications, for example.
TCP is a full-duplex protocol, so it would be easy to open a TCP
connection between the client and server, send the request message in
one direction, and send the reply message in the other direction. There
are two complications, however. The first is that TCP is a
*byte*-oriented protocol rather than a *message*-oriented protocol, and
request/reply applications always deal with messages. (We explore the
issue of bytes versus messages in greater detail in a moment.) The
second complication is that in those situations where both the request
message and the reply message fit in a single network packet, a
well-designed request/reply protocol needs only two packets to implement
the exchange, whereas TCP would need at least nine: three to establish
the connection, two for the message exchange, and four to tear down the
connection. Of course, if the request or reply messages are large enough
to require multiple network packets (e.g., it might take 100 packets to
send a 100,000-byte reply message), then the overhead of setting up and
tearing down the connection is inconsequential. In other words, it isn’t
always the case that a particular protocol cannot support a certain
functionality; it’s sometimes the case that one design is more efficient
than another under particular circumstances.

Second, as just suggested, you might question why TCP chose to provide a
reliable *byte*-stream service rather than a reliable *message*-stream
service; messages would be the natural choice for a database application
that wants to exchange records. There are two answers to this question.
The first is that a message-oriented protocol must, by definition,
establish an upper bound on message sizes. After all, an infinitely long
message is a byte stream. For any message size that a protocol selects,
there will be applications that want to send larger messages, rendering
the transport protocol useless and forcing the application to implement
its own transport-like services. The second reason is that, while
message-oriented protocols are definitely more appropriate for
applications that want to send records to each other, you can easily
insert record boundaries into a byte stream to implement this
functionality.

A third decision made in the design of TCP is that it delivers bytes
*in order* to the application. This means that it may hold onto bytes
that were received out of order from the network, awaiting some
missing bytes to fill a hole. This is enormously helpful for many
applications but turns out to be quite unhelpful if the application is
capable of processing data out of order. As a simple example, a Web
page containing multiple embedded objects doesn’t need all the objects
to be delivered in order before starting to display the page. In fact,
there is a class of applications that would prefer to handle
out-of-order data at the application layer, in return for getting data
sooner when packets are dropped or misordered within the network.  The
desire to support such applications led to the creation of not one but
two IETF standard transport protocols. The first of these was SCTP,
the *Stream Control Transmission Protocol*. SCTP provides a partially
ordered delivery service, rather than the strictly ordered service of
TCP.  (SCTP also makes some other design decisions that differ from
TCP, including message orientation and support of multiple IP
addresses for a single session.) More recently, the IETF has been
standardizing a protocol optimized for Web traffic, known as
QUIC. More on QUIC in a moment.

Fourth, TCP chose to implement explicit setup/teardown phases, but
this is not required. In the case of connection setup, it would be
possible to send all necessary connection parameters along with the
first data message. TCP elected to take a more conservative approach
that gives the receiver the opportunity to reject the connection
before any data arrives. In the case of teardown, we could quietly
close a connection that has been inactive for a long period of time,
but this would complicate applications like remote login that want to
keep a connection alive for weeks at a time; such applications would
be forced to send out-of-band “keep alive” messages to keep the
connection state at the other end from disappearing.

Finally, TCP is a window-based protocol, but this is not the only
possibility. The alternative is a *rate-based* design, in which the
receiver tells the sender the rate—expressed in either bytes or packets
per second—at which it is willing to accept incoming data. For example,
the receiver might inform the sender that it can accommodate 100 packets
a second. There is an interesting duality between windows and rate,
since the number of packets (bytes) in the window, divided by the RTT,
is exactly the rate. For example, a window size of 10 packets and a
100-ms RTT implies that the sender is allowed to transmit at a rate of
100 packets a second. It is by increasing or decreasing the advertised
window size that the receiver is effectively raising or lowering the
rate at which the sender can transmit. In TCP, this information is fed
back to the sender in the ``AdvertisedWindow`` field of the ACK for
every segment. One of the key issues in a rate-based protocol is how
often the desired rate—which may change over time—is relayed back to the
source: Is it for every packet, once per RTT, or only when the rate
changes? While we have just now considered window versus rate in the
context of flow control, it is an even more hotly contested issue in the
context of congestion control, which we will discuss in the next
chapter.

QUIC
~~~~

QUIC, *Quick UDP Internet Connections*, originated at Google in 2012
and, at the time of writing, is still undergoing standardization at
the IETF. It has already seen a moderate amount of deployment (in some
Web browsers and quite a number of popular Web sites). The fact that
it has been successful to this degree is in itself an interesting part
of the QUIC story, and indeed deployability was a key consideration
for the designers of the protocol.

The motivation for QUIC comes directly from the points we noted above
about TCP: certain design decisions have turned out to be non-optimal
for a range of applications that run over TCP, with HTTP (Web) traffic
being a particularly notable example. These issues have become more
noticeable over time, due to factors such as the rise of high-latency
wireless networks, the availability of multiple networks for a single
device (e.g., Wi-Fi and cellular), and the increasing use of
encrypted, authenticated connections on the Web. While a full
description of QUIC is beyond our scope, some of the key design
decisions are worth discussing.

.. sidebar:: Multipath TCP

	     It isn't always necessary to define a new protocol if you
	     find an existing protocol not adequately serving a
	     particular use case. Sometimes it's possible to make
	     substantial changes in how an existing protocol is
	     implemented, yet remain true to the original spec.
	     Multipath TCP is an example of such a situation.

	     The idea of Multipath TCP is to steer packets over
	     multiple paths through the Internet, for example, by
	     using two different IP addresses for one of the hosts.
	     This can be especially helpful when delivering data to a
	     mobile device that is connected to both Wi-Fi and the
	     cellular network (and hence, has two unique IP
	     addresses). Being wireless, both networks can experience
	     significant packet-loss, so being able to use both to
	     carry packets can dramatically improve the user
	     experience.  The key is for the receiving side of TCP to
	     reconstruct the original, in-order byte stream before
	     passing data up to the application, which remains unaware
	     it is sitting on top of Multipath TCP. (This is in
	     contrast to the application knowingly opening up two or
	     more TCP connections to get better performance.)

	     As simple as Multipath TCP sounds, it is incredibly
	     difficult to get right because it breaks many assumptions
	     about how TCP flow control, segment reassembly, and
	     congestion control behave. We leave it as an exercise for
	     the reader to explore these subtlties. Doing so is a
	     great way to make sure your basic understanding of TCP
	     is sound.

If network latency is high—in the hundreds of milliseconds—then a few
RTTs can quickly add up to a visible annoyance for an end
user. Establishing an HTTP session over TCP with Transport Layer
Security (:ref:`Section 8.5 <8.5 Example Systems>`) would typically
take three round trips (one for TCP session establishment and two for
setting up the encryption parameters) before the first HTTP message
could be sent. The designers of QUIC recognized that this delay—the
direct result of a layered approach to protocol design—could be
dramatically reduced if connection setup and the required security
handshakes were combined and optimized for minimal round trips.

Note also how the presence of multiple network interfaces might affect
the design. If your mobile phone loses its Wi-Fi connection and needs
to switch to a cellular connection, that would typically require both
a TCP timeout on one connection and a new series of handshakes on the
other. Making the connection something that can persist over different
network layer connections was another design goal for QUIC.

Finally, as noted above, the reliable byte stream model for TCP is a
poor match to a Web page request, when many objects need to be fetched
and page rendering could begin before they have all arrived. While
one workaround for this would be to open multiple TCP connections in
parallel, this approach (which was used in the early days of the Web)
has its own set of drawbacks, notably on congestion control (see
:ref:`Chapter 6 <Chapter 6: Congestion Control>`).

Interestingly, by the time QUIC emerged, many design decisions had
been made that presented challenges for the deployment of a new
transport protocol. Notably, many "middleboxes'' such as NATs and
firewalls (see :ref:`Section 8.5 <8.5 Example Systems>`) have enough
understanding of the existing widespread transport protocols (TCP and
UDP) that they can't be relied upon to pass a new transport
protocol. As a result, QUIC actually rides on top of UDP. In other
words, it is a transport protocol running on top of a transport
protocol. This is not as uncommon as our focus on layering might
suggest, as the next two subsections also illustrate.

QUIC implements fast connection establishment with encryption and
authentication in the first RTT. It provides a connection identifier
than persists across changes in the underlying network. It supports the
multiplexing of several streams onto a single transport connection, to
avoid the head-of-line blocking that may arise when a single packet is
dropped while other useful data continues to arrive. And it preserves
the congestion avoidance properties of TCP, an important aspect of
transport protocols that we return to in :ref:`Chapter 6 <Chapter 6:
Congestion Control>`.

tQUIC is a most interesting development in the world of transport
protocols. Many of the limitations of TCP have been known for decades,
but QUIC represents one of the most successful efforts to date to
stake out a different point in the design space. Because QUIC was
inspired by experience with HTTP and the Web—which arose long after
TCP was well established in the Internet—it presents a fascinating
case study in the unforeseen consequences of layered designs and in
the evolution of the Internet.
